---
title: A Defense of the Traditional Latin Mass
date: 2023-03-10
---

Thanks for sharing your thoughts on the TLM. I think it's really important to have honest discussions about our experiences without just falling into polemics ("only the TLM!!" or "TLM is evil!!").

I will say first, that whatever you grew up with as the primary experience of worship will define your understanding of any worship, and it takes time to digest a different form. Personally, I grew up with the new mass, and even though I have been intellectually convinced of the superiority of the old mass, I don't go often out of practical reasons, and I still struggle to connect with it to some degree. I was intellectually convinced of the superiority of the old mass mainly by Peter Kwasniewski. Listen to his online lectures if you want to hear an in-depth analysis of basically any topic around liturgy.

I'll put down a gentle defense of some of the facets of the old mass you talked about.

First, the relationship between the Bible and the liturgy is articulated very differently between the old mass and the new mass (I would think the new mass's relationship to the word of God is similar to a Protestant service, mainly because that was the intention of those who created it). You are very much correct in that the old mass does not read the Bible to the congregation, nor explain it. The first example of this is that when the Epistle and the Gospel are read, the minister does not even face the congregation, let alone reciting them in a language they do not understand! Why would this happen in the first place? Shouldn't the purpose of reading from the Bible be so that the congregation can hear it?

While the congregation understanding the word of God is a good thing, it is plainly not the purpose of the readings in the old mass. I would say the place of scripture in the old mass is in every instance to make a prayer and an offering to God, both of which are done by the sacred minister on behalf of the whole Church. Especially with the Epistle, which is read by the minister facing "ad orientem," or in the eternal orientation towards Jesus, the rising Sun, the reading of scripture becomes as an offering; the words that God has given us we give back to Him. In a way, the reading of the word of God as a prayer and offering to Him prefigures the offering of the Word made flesh back to God in the Eucharistic sacrifice.

This obviously contrasts with the mode of using scripture during liturgy as a teaching aid. While one could awkwardly read my previous explanation of scripture's use during the liturgy into the new mass, clearly the new mass and (I'm assuming) most Evangelical services use the scripture to instruct and edify first of all. Again, this is a good thing, but it's simply not the goal of the old mass. By the way, mass should not be the only time Catholics read their Bibles. The new mass works by reading passages from scripture to the congregation and then concluding the "Liturgy of the Word" by the priest explaining that scripture to the congregation. This turns mass into a lecture or a Bible study, instead of an act of solemn worship. It frustrates me when at daily mass I listen to a ten minute long homily that is not much different from the ten minute long homily I head at yesterday's mass, but we don't have enough time to use the Roman Canon which Catholics have been praying for millennia (I believe it was basically finished by the time of St. Gregory the Great) but we instead use the agonizingly abrupt and functionalist Eucharistic Prayer 2. Anyways, Bible study is a good thing, but the old mass does not try to be a Bible study.

This all dovetails into the differences between how the old and new masses allow the worshiper to understand what is happening. The new mass generally tries to make comprehension happen by talking to you the whole mass. The orientation of the proper orations (those are the prayers that change each mass, the Collect, the Prayer over the Offerings, and the Prayer after Communion) are always prayed towards the congregation, as is the Eucharistic prayer, even though these prayers are addressed to God. Where the old mass makes things hidden, by veiling things like the chalice and the tabernacle and even rood screens in old English churches (many Eastern liturgies completely hide the moment of the Eucharistic miracle with an iconostasis), the new mass attempts to reveal everything to the layman in the pews by uncovering everything, saying everything loudly, towards him in the vernacular, and generally simplifying and linearizing the whole liturgy. Everything is one step to the next, everyone in lock-step fixated on whatever the current task is, whether reading, or singing, or sermonizing.

These changes would all be beneficial if the mass were something like a business meeting, with topics to cover, selected information to present, analysis of that information given, and then some common ritual of understanding (software people could think of this as a daily standup maybe). Certainly having regular business meetings in a dead language where the person running the meeting was whispering most of the time and multiple different items were being addressed at the same time by different people would be a horrible way to organize them. The old mass is not trying to be a meeting. There is an agenda, but you can choose whether to follow every word, or to pray your rosary, or to just be silent and prayerfully attentive.

Furthermore, the signs of the old mass that were somewhat removed in the new mass can no longer bring the layman in the pews to a deeper understanding of what is happening at mass, an understanding that sinks below the surface level of "I know those words that the priest just said". The reverence shown to the Eucharist in the old mass is so much more impactful than just hearing the words "This is my body". Obviously, it is possible to celebrate the new mass in a similarly reverent manner, but that is not what 99% of Catholics experience at mass. Consider how few Catholics actually believe what the Church teaches about the Eucharist, and it's reasonable to think that sacrificing signs of reverence for immediate understanding hasn't increased belief.

The Latin serves this purpose specifically in the fact that it is not your vernacular tongue. Latin creates a distance between the layman and the guts of the mass. This makes verbal, rational comprehension difficult, yes, but aren't we actually, in fact distant from the miracle occurring? The Church teaches that Heaven and Earth touch at the moment of the consecration, so shouldn't that separation be reflected in the worship? If you received communion at the old mass, you would have approached the communion rail, the barrier that separates Heaven and Earth symbolically, and received the Holy Body on the tongue, recognizing that your hands are not worthy to touch the sacred species. This kind of separation allows a deeper understanding of what's happening to sink in. Surely this is no ordinary bread: we do not handle it like ordinary bread. Surely these words we are saying are not the ordinary stuff of discussion: we say them instead in Latin.

I would also say that familiarity with the Latin used during mass isn't actually inaccessible to most people after longer exposure. If you go to mass in Latin for any length of time, you will start to understand what those words mean.

I'm going on for too long, but assisting at the old mass is a completely different experience from the new mass, and do not be surprised that it does not meet very well the criteria that you are accustomed to from the new mass or Evangelical services. It definitely takes a long time to really internalize the rhythm that the old mass moves with. I'm not trying to proselytize or throw down on the new mass. I simply wanted to explain why the old mass is different and doesn't fit the criteria you mentioned.
